The theme of this program is taken from the second part of Romans 12-10
and showing honor to one another, take the lead.
What is honor? In the Hebrew scriptures, the term translated honor literally means
heaviness. So when we honor someone, we're acknowledging that he's weighty or that he
mounts to something. In the Greek scriptures, the word is related to setting a price on something,
meaning that the one we honor is esteemed or has value.
Whom should we honor? Of course, Jehovah is worthy of honor.
Revelation chapter 4 verse 11 says this and gives us the reason for giving glory and honor to Jehovah.
It says because he created all things. He is responsible for us having life in the first place.
How do we give him honor? There are many ways that we honor him by doing his will,
obeying his laws and principles. We honor him by extolling his qualities and promises,
telling others about these gifts from God. We show him honor by contributing financially
to the worldwide educational work that he's directing through his son and Holy Spirit.
And just as Revelation chapter 4 said about Jehovah being worthy of the honor,
Revelation chapter 5 verse 12 says that his son Christ Jesus is worthy of the same.
Verse 12 says of Jesus, they were saying with a loud voice, the lamb who slaughtered is worthy
to receive the power and riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing.
How do we show honor to Jesus? One way is acknowledged in the verse we just read.
He was slaughtered like a sacrificial lamb so that we might have the hope of everlasting life.
We highly esteem and value that sacrifice. We honor Jesus by recognizing his role as an immortal
king of kings in the heavens. And another very practical way to honor Jesus
is to strive to imitate his life and personality as the model for us to follow closely.
If we take the lead in showing honor, who else will we view as highly valued to be treated
with esteem? Ephesians 6 1 and 2 says that children honor their father and mother when
they're obedient to them. Matthew 15 4 through 6 makes it clear that adult children honor their
parents and grandparents by giving material assistance to them as needed. First Timothy 5 or 17
urges us to give elders double honor because of their hard work in our behalf.
Romans 13, 1 and 7 even extends the matter of showing honor to governmental rulers and
others in authority. First Peter 2 verse 17 broadens the meaning of honor even further saying
honor men of all sorts. In addition to being kind and respectful to people in general,
we also honor them by being willing to spend time sharing the good news with them. Ephesians 5 22
through 25 appeals to wives to honor their husbands by having Christ-like subjection for them.
Husbands are to honor their wives by showing them love and treating them just as Jesus treated
the congregation. And what about our theme text for this discussion?
Who was Paul addressing in Romans chapter 12 when he said and showing honor to one another take
the lead? Who hardly one another in that verse? Look at Romans chapter 1 and verse 7 with me.
Paul says he's writing to all those who are in Rome as God's beloved ones call to be holy ones.
So all of us in the Christian congregation are to have honor for each other.
I'd like to spend the balance of my time discussing two of the many opportunities we have to show honor.
They're the last two that I just referenced. First, marriage mates showing honor to each
other and second, showing honor to one another in our congregations. Marriage is in general today
are seriously lacking in honor. Marriage mates often demean one another with harsh words and
disrespectful attitudes. Some in the world resort to physical violence as if that somehow makes
the abusive one right in his view of what are the issue is. An infidelity, a part of one or both
mates is so common. It doesn't even raise eyebrows anymore. All of this is a gross lack of honor
and marriage. But what about marriages of those professing to be Jehovah's Witnesses?
We're blessed with so many marriages that are wholesome and honorable, true, none are perfect.
But how blessed we are to have the truth and to have learned to be more and more Christlike with each
other. We've learned to shed things we heard when we're growing up. However, the matter of honoring
our marriage mate needs to be discussed while relatively few of our marriages end up with some
kind of physical violence and relatively few end up in divorce. What about having honor in the
marriage? After living together as husband and wife for many months or for years or even for
decades, familiarity can cause us to treat each other with less respect or honor than when we
were courting. That isn't right. It isn't Christlike. But with our inherited imperfection,
we may succumb to dishonable words and behavior with the one we promise to treasure until death
do us part. How can we get a grip on this trait and minimize the times that we have a clash of
spirit and words? First, let's consider the two basic responsibilities assigned to marriage mates.
This is the foundation that we can then build on to improve. The role of the husbands clearly
stated at 1 Corinthians 11 and verse 3, and while some wives in society made bristle at this thought,
why serving Jehovah are to embrace this thought? It's the arrangement of God. 1 Corinthians 11 and
verse 3 says, but I want you to know that the head of every man is the Christ and turn the head of
a woman as the man and turn the head of the Christ is God. God's word says that the head of a woman
is the man. However, the head of the woman is not to be a domineering man, not an abuse of man
verbally or physically. He used to imitate his head. And who is that? What did the first part of
the verse say? They head of every man is the Christ. In fact, Ephesians chapter 5 strikes this
fine balance between being ahead of the wife and being a loving head like the Christ. Ephesians 5,
22 and 23 says, let wise be in subjection to their husbands as to the Lord. What of the disposition
of the husband? Because a husband is head of his wife, just as the Christ is head of the congregation,
he being a savior of this body. That verse says it all. Verse 33 of the same chapter says this,
each one of you must love his wife as he does himself. On the other hand, the wife should have
deep respect for her husband. There's nowhere in God's word that says that if one mate pushes the
other mate's button emotionally, that it cancels the offended mate's obligation to be Christ-like.
The problem is that when one mate is offended or hurt, it's so easy to roll the eyes and discuss
or to lash back with a verbal insult. Then the other mate fires back with another harsh cutting
remark. It's like when on a forest fire, temper's blaze in the evening goes up in smoke.
It's not at all Christ-like. There's no honor shown in such a conflagration. It has to stop sooner
rather than later. The January 15th 2015 issue of the Watchtower said this, remember that marriage
is not a competition to find out who is stronger, who can shout louder, or who can think of the most
cutting remark. True, we all have flaws and sometimes we upset others, but there is never a
justifiable reason for either a husband or a wife to use sarcastic and demeaning speech or worse
to shove or hit each other. How can we change the atmosphere? Someone needs to put out the fire
with the water of God's Word. Romans 12, 10, and then be part again in showing honor to one
other, take the lead. One of the mates must take the lead, even if at the time they're apologizing
for their own behavior, acknowledging that they didn't respond in a Christ-like way saying,
forgive me. That same issue of the Watchtower cited two scriptures, one for the husband and one for
the wife. We'll first read Proverbs 17, verse 27. Husbands listen to this and apply it prior to a
rift, or even during the conflict, Proverbs 17, 27. A man of knowledge restrains his words
and a discerning man will remain calm. Husbands, does that describe us? Now wives, please locate
Proverbs 31, 26. Does this describe your speech even when some altercation occurs?
Proverbs 31, 26. She opens her mouth in wisdom. The law of kindness is on her tongue.
Usually after a misunderstanding and rash words have been said, we feel miserable and upset.
We often chastise ourselves or adding fuel to the fire. How much better to train ourselves to
restrain our words and remain calm and to speak in wisdom and with kindness of tongue? Meet Emuel
in Faruca, Garbovon from Romania. Their good examples of how the power of God's word can mold and
change the attitudes of marriage mates, willing to be guided by it. It was in 1983 when I met
Filuca. I already had two little girls. One was seven years old and the other one was three.
I accepted to study the Bible. My husband worked as a warrant officer for the police,
so at the beginning I studied in secret. Then I decided to tell him the truth.
When I found out that my wife was studying the Bible in order to become one of Jehovah's Witnesses,
I became very sad. And I realised that our marriage, our family was in danger because I only
knew bad things about Jehovah's Witnesses. He threatened he would divorce me and he did.
The divorce was a very difficult time in my life because I was seven months pregnant with our
third daughter. Following the divorce, my husband was given the house and the custody of our two
daughters. I had to leave the house and I stayed for almost a year with two families of our brothers.
I saw Jehovah's love towards me and I loved Jehovah very much, but I loved my husband too.
One day as I was walking and holding the little girl's hand, I saw Filuca's husband walking
toward me. My heart stopped and I said to myself, he is going to hit me.
Patemil was a gentleman and he took the little girl in his arms,
talked to her for a few minutes and then he put her back down and left.
When I saw him leaving, I thanked Jehovah because he didn't beat me.
In 1990, I looked for my wife and I told her that I would like to remarry her to reunite our family.
And after a while, she agreed and step by step I started to study.
In 2003, I became one of Jehovah's Witnesses. I am very happy that I made this change
and I regret that I didn't do it sooner. I personally saw how the truth can change a person's
life even in my own family. Currently, I serve as an elder and in 2010, I became a regular pioneer.
When I see Emil conduct the Bible study next to me, I feel like kneeling rather than standing
to thank Jehovah. So to married couples who loved Jehovah, we repeat and showing honor,
take the lead. The principles of just discussed can also be applied when showing honor
to others in the congregation. Like the husband and wife that we just discussed,
all of us should be improving in imitating Jesus and in following his steps closely
in all of our interactions with fellow believers in the congregation.
How do we show honor to one another? One way is well described at First Corinthians
chapter 10, verse 23, and verse 24. We show honor when we put the other person's feelings and needs
ahead of our own. First Corinthians 10, 23, and 24. All things are lawful, but not all things
are advantageous. All things are lawful, but not all things build up. Let each one keep seeking
not his own advantage, but that of the other person. We show honor when we suppress our own rights.
What we do or say might be lawful, but is it advantageous? Will it build up?
Verse 24 then concisely says it, keep seeking not our own advantage or right, but that of the other
person. We show honor to others when we do good deeds for them. Possibly it's even a humble task
that an elderly publisher needs done. It could be offering to clean the house, take them to the
store or fill some other need. The principal is at Luke 22, verse 26, you though are not to be that
way, but let the one who is the greatest among you become as the youngest and the one taking the
lead as the one ministering. Earlier, I cited 1st Timothy 517 where we're urged to give elders
double honor because of their hard work in our behalf. They're also part of our congregation
and deserve honor. In our August program last year, brother let helped us consider much of what
is involved. You'll recall that his subject was appreciating our gifts in men.
We minister to or honor others when we readily forgive them if they've embarrassed us or
heard our feelings. Overall, Jehovah's people do quite well in honoring one another in the congregation.
But here's the question, are we improving in this aspect of our Christian personality?
In our theme scripture, Paul didn't just say to honor one another. He said to why now
or reach out in this aspect of our Christian life, his words were to take the lead.
If Paul had just said to show honor to each other, that would be like a teacher urging a group of
literate students to learn to read. If they're literate, they don't need to learn to read.
But what might be the teacher urging them to do? He might encourage them to read better
or to improve. Love is the identifying mark of Christ's disciples. So honor is something we've
learned to show. However, like the teacher, Paul is urging us to improve in this area. He said,
take the lead in showing honor. The footnote says this could be rendered taking the initiative
in showing honor. Instead of waiting for some obvious reason to do good for others to commend someone
to check on a shut-in, look for opportunities to take the initiative to show honor in the family
and in our congregations. Yes, in showing honor, take the lead.